CLOVER Updates Register

This guide provides a very brief overview of the updates to the CLOVER model.
	1.	Update to Load.py (28.11.18)
			Minor tidying.
	2.	Update to Conversion.py (28.11.18)
			Minor updates to comments;
			Addition of self.daily_sum_to_monthly_sum(...).
	3.	Update to Load.py (12.12.18)
			Addition of function to calculate load statistics (aggregated
			yearly) for later integration into other modules.
	4.	Update to Energy_System.py (12.12.18)
			self.simulation(…) restructured to fix bugs (unmet energy
			miscalculations, grid energy recorded as “-0”);
			self.simulation(…) now gives two outputs (system performance outputs
			as before, and description of installed system capacity for later
			use);
			Change of function orders in file.
	5.	Addition of “Impact Scripts” and Finance.py (12.12.18)
			Added to “Scripts” folder;
			Script for calculating financial impacts.
	6.	Addition of “Impact” folder in Bahraich location folder (12.12.18)
			Added “Finance inputs.csv”.
	7.	Addition of “Impact” folder in New_Location folder (12.12.18)
			Added “Finance inputs.csv”.
	8.	Addition of “Optimisation” folder in Bahraich location folder (12.12.18)
			Added “Optimisation inputs.csv”.
			Added example saved optimisations
	9.	Addition of “Optimisation” folder in New_Location folder (12.12.18)
			Added “Optimisation inputs.csv”;
			Added example saved optimisations.
	10.	Addition of Optimisation.py (12.12.18)
			Added to “Scripts” folder;
			Script for optimising system sizes.
	11. Addition of To Do list (07.01.19)
			List of upcoming updates and known issues to solve.
	12. Bug fixes of Finance.py (21.01.19)
			Fixing bug to enable calling inputs from "Finance inputs.csv".
	13. Addition of GHGs.py to "Impact" folder (01.02.19)
			Added to "Scripts" folder;
			Script for calculating GHG impact.
	14.	Addition to “Impact” folder in Bahraich location folder (01.02.19)
			Added “GHG inputs.csv”.
	15.	Addition to “Impact” folder in New_Location folder (01.02.19)
			Added “GHG inputs.csv”.
	16. Update to Optimisation.py (01.02.19)
			Integrated GHG assessment into optimisation processes;
			Minor bug fixes.
	17. Update to Solar.py (14.03.19)
			Minor bug fixes.
	18. Update to Grid.py (03.05.19)
			Added function to change grid profile hours.
	19.	Update to Energy_System.py (03.05.19)
			Now able to simulate systems with no PV and/or storage.
	20.	Update to Optimisation.py (03.05.19)
			Fixes to accomodate zero PV/storage size.
	21. Update to Optimisation.py (18.07.19)
			Inclusion of GHG module to Optimisation.py;
			Bug fix for fraction of unmet demand calculation.
	22. Update to Solar.py (01.08.19)
			Bug fix to solar degradation function to allow 20 year time horizon.
	23.	Update to Energy_System.py (17.02.20)
			Allows different c-rates into/out of batteries.
	25. Update to Load.py (17.06.20)
			Added function to calculate yearly load statistics when using a
			load profile not generated using the standard methodology.
	26. v5.0.0a1.dev1 (22.09.21)
			First development version of CLOVER 5.0 available for download:
				Code restructured;
				Many CSV file replaced with YAML files;
				Clean-water demand in development.
	27.	v5.0.0a1.dev4 (08.11.21)
			Rudimentary clean-water system running ready for CLOVER 5.1
	28. v5.0.0a1.dev5 (17.11.21)
			Rudimentary hot-water system running ready for CLOVER 5.1
	29. v5.0.0a1 (03.12.21)
			First alpha release of CLOVER 5.0
	30. v5.0.0rc2 (08.04.22)
			Release candidate of CLOVER 5.0 created
	31. v5.0.0 (08.04.22)
			CLOVER 5.0 released
	32. v5.1.0a1.dev1
			Hot-water PV-T system working bar pdb breakpoints

Minor changes not recorded as pull requests:
	i.	Bug fixes of Solar.py (01.02.19)
			Corrected test variable left over from testing phase to live
			variable.
	ii.	Update to README file (01.02.19)
			Added step to consider GHG inputs.
	iii.	Bug fix of Solar.py (19.11.19)
			Fixed Renewables.ninja API interface.

For more information, contact Phil Sandwell (philip.sandwell@gmail.com), Ben Winchester
(benedict.winchester@gmail.com) or Hamish Beath, or go to the list of CLOVER pull
requests (https://github.com/phil-sandwell/CLOVER/pulls)
